---
layout: default
title: The Real World and the Self: Deconstructing Identity and Choice
---

# The Real World and the Self: Deconstructing Identity and Choice

When the roman emperor Julius Caesar crossed the river Rubicon and entered enemy territory, he famously declared, "The die has been cast." This phrase implied that from that moment onward, battle was his only option, and, in this sense, its outcome had been predetermined. I believe (though I’ve never seen anyone else claim it) that the die he referred to belonged to the Greek/Roman deity Decuma/Lachesis — one of the three Fates, who, according to a myth, determined the course of each person’s life by casting a die. While I might be wrong about the reference, the phrase nevertheless serves as a fitting illustration of the Greco-Roman view of fate as a destiny — predetermined and immutable, like a thread through which we are all bound to travel (another image drawn from the myth of the three Fates).

But that view is nonsense, fate isn’t predetermined. At any moment, Caesar could have chosen to retreat, surrender, spend the day fishing in the Rubicon, or pursue a thousand other things instead of, or in parallel with fighting. The reason Julius Caesar dismissed all those options, and pretended they won't exist, is not that he was not capable of doing them. It was because that he *wouldn’t be Julius Caesar* if he went with any of them, meaning they wouldn’t fit the narrative that is himself e.g. would Caesar be Caesar if he retreats?

In much the same way, each of us has countless options that could dramatically alter our fate. Yet we rarely consider the vast majority of them simply because we feel that choosing them would make us lose our identity.

The idea of the self, like identity in general, is a personification of what is knowable, what is interpretable using the default interpretation that we perceive the world through — our memories, the things we know and believe — these make up who we are. Any habit, thought, or urge that falls outside this narrative isn’t truly part of the self. And this isn’t because such habits/thoughts/urges are rare, better, worse, or in any way different from the rest of your habits/thoughts/urges. They aren’t part of the self precisely because they aren’t part of the narrative.

> 0.  The self is not who you are, but who you want to be — your projected goal, through the default interpretation.

We are defined by what we identify with. When we identify with an idea or dogma, our sense of self is tied to its validity — meaning, if the idea is proven wrong, our identity feels threatened. 

This is why the self-concept clings so tightly to its beliefs: unlike ordinary, empirical ideas that can be weakened by being proven wrong, the concept of the self resists this challenge, by causing the so--called "conflicts with ourselves".

> 1. All conflicts within ourselves are essentially conflicts between different types of goals, each of which entails different interpretations of reality. For instance, believing that `A ⇒ B` and perceiving the world in terms of A’s and B’s implies one role for us, while believing that `X ⇒ Y` and perceiving the world in terms of X’s and Y’s implies a different role. The common characteristic of these views is that they both necessitate _a_ role, as they wouldn’t exist otherwise. In this sense, we might say that there isn’t one `M`, but many `M`’s, all interconnected.




## Society 

It is often said that the definition of insanity is doing the same thing over and over and expecting different results. This saying clearly embodies one of the main (if not _the_ main) postulates of all human societies. In just a few words, it describes both the function that all people have in society (making the world behave uniformly for everyone) and what to do with those who refuse to participate in that task (label them as "insane," i.e., exclude them from it).

In reality, this principle is not entirely true. In fact, I'd argue that the truth is the exact reverse. For example, Suppose I experience something that brings me positive emotions (e.g. consume some tasty food). According to this principle, I would experience the exact same emotions if I do that thing again (and would strive to repeat it). But obviously this doesn't work --- When you are eating a tasty snack and experiencing pleasure, there are many factors that may have contributed to that pleasure (how hungry you are, what time of the day was it, what did you eat before**). Overall, this event (eating the snack) is connected to every other event that precedes it, up to the first thing that you perceived before your birth --- every event that you ever experience may contribute to your current experience, no matter if you remember it consciously. Similarily, in the universe, it's not accurate to say that an event follows from other event alone, but rather that everything follows from everything else. And sane people should be aware of that, so perhaps a more fitting definition of insanity would be --- doing the same thing over and over and expecting _similar_ results all the time.

You might argue that my example is simplistic (e.g. that anyone in their right mind would know when to stop eating). However, the reality is that most of us do not know (or we know in theory but not in practice). And that even this basic and seemingly obvious fallacy is something we struggle to grasp, and I believe it is enough to illustrate my point. Thoughts like "more is better" (and that one about the definition of insanity) are an inherent defect of the way we perceive the world. They are the truisms that hold our society together.

This is the time to say that, as actors play a role for the audience that watches them, we cultivate our self, our default interpretation, in sync with the society we live in. Society is also the reason we keep our memories the way that we do --- because, if we forget, there would be someone to remember for us. If we want to alter our self, there would be someone to deny us that right. It is society, and not the individual, that creates the default interpretation of reality which is then implanted in everyones' minds through memories. 


## References

-- For more on the recursive nature of the self, refer to _Gödel, Escher, Bach_ by Douglas Hofstadter.
